in 2056 a.d earth is an ecological
crisis as a consequence of pollution and
overpopulation
automated interplanetary missions have
been seeding mars
with atmosphere producing algae as the
first stage of terraforming the planet
when the oxygen quantity produced by the
algae is inexplicably reduced
the crew of mars one investigate when
mars one is damaged in arrival by a
gamma-ray burst
omen remains aboard for repair while the
others land to locate an automated
habitat
harp 1 established earlier to
manufacture food and oxygen
during insertion the team's landing
craft is damaged and lands off course
in the aftermath amy autonomous mapping
exploration and evasion
a military robot programmed to guide
them is lost
and chantillas suffers a ruptured spleen
and internal bleeding
and tells the others to leave him behind
santan refuses
but chantillas tells them that they have
limited oxygen left to make it to harp
1.
chantilas tells gallagher that it is all
right as he got to see mars for the
first time
the crew leaves to allow chantilas to
die in peace
in orbit around mars bowman contacts
houston
which informs her that mars 1 is in
decaying orbit but offers hope of
restoring engine function in departing
mars
on mars the landing party find harp 1
mysteriously destroyed
they are baffled for an explanation
since the module was designed and field
tested in tornado alley to withstand any
damaging storms on mars
all expect their imminent deaths by
suffocation
pettingell and santan wander from the
others to explore later to reach a
canyon where pettingell accidentally
kills santan
after they get into a fight over whether
or not the mission was a failure
and that pettingell realizes that santon
would never accept defeat
pettingell returns to burchinol and
gallagher and tells them that santan
killed himself
his oxygen depleted gallagher opens his
helmet
choosing a quick death over asphyxiation
and discovers that mars atmosphere is
thin but breathable
the only salvageable material from the
habitat is all of the liquid fuel
which is ruptured out of its containers
but pooled under the wreck
with no remaining power in their suits
the astronauts set it on fire with a
flare so they can have a bonfire to
survive the massive temperature drop of
the martian knight
amy reunites with the crew and the three
astronauts notice the robot
is damaged and attempt to shut it down
so they can recover its guidance device
perceiving their actions as a threat amy
breaks birchnell's ribs and pursues the
others before retreating
gallagher tells the others she has gone
into military mode and intends to kill
them all one by one
she wounded birchnell instead of killing
him because she has been programmed with
knowledge of the old guerrilla tactic
that a wounded man will slow the enemy
down since effort must be expended to
transport a wounded teammate
eventually gallagher builds a makeshift
radio from parts of the mars rover
pathfinder
through which bowman instructs them to
use a russian probe sample return system
to launch themselves into orbit
during the trip bowman tells gallagher
that the probe can hold only two people
the trio takes shelter from an ice storm
inside of a cave
devastated by the recent news and afraid
of being left behind
petting all flees with the radio only to
be killed by amy
after the storm subsides gallagher and
birchnell recover the radio from
potingles corpse
and discover that it has become infested
by insect like native martian life
identified by virginal as nematodes the
insects are highly flammable
as using a simple cutting torch on
pettingell's corpse to free his grip
caused a chain reaction making all the
insects in his corpse explode like
firecrackers
later the two encounter a field of algae
being eaten by the insects
and burchenal pieces together what
happened the martian insects had lain
dormant on their almost dead world
but when the probes from earth spread
algae fields across mars it gave them a
massive new food source and led to a
population explosion
the martian insects are what caused the
algae to disappear
but in the process they actually gave
mars breathable oxygen levels
because they produce oxygen as a waste
product explaining why they are so
flammable
the insects are also what destroyed the
habitat module
as they tore in to get to the food
supplies inside
birchnall explains to gallagher that the
biochemistry of alien insects
respiratory metabolism is capable of
producing oxygen far more efficiently
than human science is currently able to
studying the insects biochemistry is the
key to terraforming mars
and may even lead to discoveries which
will allow earth's polluted atmosphere
to be repaired
however virginal is attacked by swarms
of the insects when blood drips from an
open wound rather than be eaten alive he
passes his sample vial of insects to
gallagher before immolating himself and
his attackers
gallagher reaches the russian probe
found sufficient fuel to power the
rocket's engine
but not enough electrical power to
launch the probe and realizes that the
only available replacement is amy's
power core
in a final confrontation gallagher is
able to lure amy into a trap and disable
her using one of the probe's sample
launchers
then takes her battery gallagher
launches himself in the probe's sample
return
capsule and reaches orbit where mars one
is waiting for him
and he is recovered and revived by
bowman gallagher becomes upset that four
astronauts died so that he could live
but bowman tells him that they did not
die for nothing
the computer is busy analyzing the
sample of martian insects which
gallagher brought back
and research on them might lead to
repairing earth itself
with a six-month-long trip back to earth
the computer has plenty of time to
analyze the insects which
brings hope for humanity